Once food reaches homes, waste is often the result of problems of inadequate management practices, skills and knowledge. Many households find themselves disposing of the contents of a bag or box found in the back of a cupboard after the best-before date has expired. Dates on packs are very conservative, and if dried products like rice or pasta are stored properly – dry and in airtight containers – it can last long after the pack date. But if you are not confident in knowing the signs of mould (discoloration, visible growth, a rancid or otherwise bad smell), it can feel risky to cook it.
Many people routinely cook more than is needed for a meal and end up throwing a lot out. Rice is a common side dish when eating Asian food in restaurants or as takeaways, and almost invariably more is served than is eaten. Many of us are aware that reheated rice carries the risk of food poisoning, thanks to the bacterium Bacillus cereus. But the bacterium will not grow unless the cooked rice is left warm for at least a couple of hours and then reheated. Cold cooked rice is very low risk, and if it is cooled, put in a container and refrigerated within a few hours, it is perfectly safe to reheat.
There is also a big question mark over how much of that food waste is not avoided but, rather, passed on to the consumer. Magic bags will contain a mixture of items people want and those they don’t; those they can’t eat now but can freeze and those they can’t. “The food waste just moves from the supermarket bin to your bin – and you have paid for it,” says Juul.
Juul argues that no scheme to distribute surplus food can be a solution because “we need to talk about the prevention of overproduction of food. If you go to a store even five minutes before closing time, it has every product on the shelf. If you go to a restaurant, especially canteens, they continually overproduce 30% more food. The biggest nightmare for a chef is that there’s not enough food for the guests. This is overproduction, and that is where it hurts. There are a lot of interests, economic interests, political interests, and it’s not that easy.”
ne simple way to reduce food waste is to improve packaging. For example, as part of its waste-reduction push, REMA 1000 started to use two layers of packaging to extend the shelf life of its cold cut meats like rullepølse (a kind of rolled pork) and kyllingebrystfilet (chicken breast), resulting in less being thrown away. The only downside, of course, is that this means more packaging, with all the waste and greenhouse gas emissions that come with it. And the modern food system produces a lot of packaging. In the UK, the packaging industry is worth more in financial terms than all the food that comes off farms.
REMA 1000’s cold cuts encapsulate the dilemmas and trade-offs involved with food packaging and waste. Loose fruit bruises more easily, leading to more being uneaten; salad leaves stay fresh and crisp for longer when packed in airtight, nitrogen-filled plastic bags; vacuum-packed sliced hams can be kept for months when they would otherwise dry up in days. Ideally, we want less waste and less packaging, but in practice, less of one often means more of the other. As a Swedish study put it: “Packaging is often considered an environmental villain, which can lead to missed opportunities for reducing food waste.”
The right thing to do will vary from product to product, and there is some packaging that is purely cosmetic and egregious. Much depends on the specifics of the food and the packaging. In that earlier Swedish study, they found that cheese had 58 times more environmental impact than its packaging, whereas ketchup had only twice as much. Still, these and the other three foods studied – bread, milk and beef – all had a bigger environmental footprint than their wrapping. So while all packaging places a burden on planetary resources, when it is used well it helps to conserve them.

